
{toc:minLevel=2}

h1. API for checklist evaluation

See also:
* [docs:Integrity and Authenticity component] \- has early discussions of API function and design
* [RODL interfaces - ver. 5|RO SRS REST interface - ver. 5]
* [Research Objects Digital Library (including the ROSRS)|docs:Research Objects Digital Library (including the ROSRS)]
* [docs:RO dereferencing]

TODO:

* Select URI base for relation types in service document


h2. Command-line equivalent function

{code}
ro evaluate checklist [ -d <dir> ] [ -a | -l <level> ] <minim> <purpose> [ <target> ]
{code}
where:
* <dir> is the directory containing the RO to be evaluated
* <level> indicates the level of information detail to be returned
* <minim> is a URI reference for a minimum information model resource from which the checklist definition is obtained
* <target> is a target resource with respect to which the evaluation is performed; the default <target> is the RO itself, but a component within the RO may be selected.
* <purpose> is a keyword indicating the purpose for which the RO or <target> is to be evaluated.

For example:
{code}
ro evaluate checklist -d /workspace/myro -l all /workspace/minim.rdf "creation" myro/wfoutput.dat
{code}
might evaluate the RO at /workspace/myro using the minim model in file /workspace/minim.rdf

See:
* [https://github.com/wf4ever/ro-manager/tree/master/doc]
* [https://github.com/wf4ever/ro-manager/tree/master/src/iaeval/Minim]
* [https://github.com/wf4ever/ro-catalogue/blob/master/v0.1/simple-requirements/simple-requirements-minim.rdf] (minim example)
* [http://www.wf4ever-project.org/wiki/display/docs/RO+decay+detection+using+checklists] (more examples of individual minim requirements)

h2. Web API

The Web API is intended to provide remote access to the above functionality using a simple HTTP request.

Research Objects and other data are provided as web resources, and indicated in the API using their URIs.

h3. Example

Suppose we have:
* A checklist evaluation service accessible at <[http://service.example.org/evaluate/checklist]>
* An RO with URI <[http://sandbox.example.org/ROs/myro]>
* A MINIM minimum information model description (containing checklist definitions including one for repeatability) at <[http://another.example.com/minim/repeatable.rdf]>
* The checklist definition in the MINIM model for repeatability is associated with the purpose keyword "repeatable".

Note: there is an example of a simple minim model at [https://github.com/wf4ever/ro-catalogue/blob/master/v0.1/simple-requirements/simple-requirements-minim.rdf]

A sequence of HTTP operations using the checklist service interface might then look like this:

# Client retrieves service document:
{code}
C: GET /evaluate/checklist HTTP/1.1
C: Host: service.example.org
C: Accept: application/rdf+xml

S: HTTP/1.1 200 OK
S: Content-Type: application/rdf+xml
S:
S: <?xml version="1.0"?>
S: <rdf:RDF xmlns:rdf="http://www.w3.org/1999/02/22-rdf-syntax-ns#"
S:   xmlns:roe="http://purl.org/ro/service/evaluate/">
S:   <rdf:Description rdf:about="">
S:     <roe:checklist>/evaluate/checklist{?RO,minim,target,purpose}</roe:checklist>
S:   </rdf:Description>
S: </rdf:RDF>
{code}
# Client parses the service document, extracts the URI template for the checklist evaluation service and assembles URI for the desired evaluation result (cf. RFC6570), and issues a new HTTP GET request:
{code}
C: GET /evaluate/checklist?RO=http%3A%2F%2Fsandbox.example.org%2FROs%2Fmyro
         &minim=http%3A%2F%2Fanother.example.com%2Fminim%2Frepeatable.rdf
         &purpose=repeatable HTTP/1.1
C: Host: service.example.org
C: Accept: application/rdf+xml

S: HTTP/1.1 200 OK
S: Content-Type: application/rdf+xml
S:
S: <?xml version="1.0"?>
S: <rdf:RDF xmlns:rdf="http://www.w3.org/1999/02/22-rdf-syntax-ns#"
S:   xmlns:...="..."
S:   >
S:   <rdf:Description rdf:about="...">
S:     (Result of checklist evaluation @@detailsTBD)
S:   </rdf:Description>
S: </rdf:RDF>
{code}

That's it.  The result from the second request is the checklist evaluation.  The URI shown above has been split over several lines for readability - the actual HTTP request must present it without whitespace. The optional target URI parameter has been omitted in this example on the assumption that the target is the RO itself.

References:
* [http://tools.ietf.org/html/rfc2616]
* [http://tools.ietf.org/html/rfc3986]
* [http://tools.ietf.org/html/rfc6570]
* [https://github.com/wf4ever/ro-manager/blob/master/src/iaeval/Minim/minim.rdf]

h3. Resources

h4. RO Service description

The RO service description is an RDF file that contains URI templates for accessing RO related services.

Example:
{code}
    <?xml version="1.0"?>
    <rdf:RDF
      xmlns:rdf="http://www.w3.org/1999/02/22-rdf-syntax-ns#"
      xmlns:roe="http://purl.org/ro/service/evaluate/"
      >
      <rdf:Description rdf:about="">
        <roe:checklist>/evaluate/checklist{?RO,minim,target,purpose}</roe:checklist>
      </rdf:Description>
    </rdf:RDF>
{code}

See:
* [http://tools.ietf.org/html/rfc6570]

h4. Research Object

See:

* [docs:RO model]
* [docs:Research Object Vocabulary Specification]
* [docs:Research Object model]

h4. Minim description

The MINIM description contains 3 levels of description:

# "minim:Constraint" map a target+purpose (e.g. runnable RO) to a minim:Model
to be evaluated.
# "minim:Model" encodes the checklist (list of requirements) to be evaluated.
(There is provision for MUST / SHOULD / MAY requirements in a checklist to
cater for limited variation in levels of conformance.)
# "minim:Requirement" is a rule for evaluating a single requirement as being
satisfied or not satisfied. Each rule makes reference to what I have called a
"checklist primitive" function. I propose that additional capabilities can be
added (in due course) by expanding the set of available checklist primitives;
e.g. see [http://www.wf4ever-project.org/wiki/display/docs/RO+decay+detection+using+checklists]

These are called out in the examples that follow

See:
* [https://github.com/wf4ever/ro-manager/blob/master/src/iaeval/Minim/minim.rdf]
* [https://github.com/wf4ever/ro-catalogue/blob/master/v0.1/simple-requirements/simple-requirements-minim.rdf]
* [http://www.wf4ever-project.org/wiki/display/docs/RO+Examples]

h5. Minim Constraint

The "constraint" provides the basis for mapping from target+purpose values to a particular {{minim:Model}} to be used as the basis of an evaluation. Relative URI references are resolved relative to the location of the Minim resource.  In this case, the Minim resource is in the root directory of an RO, so "." refers to the RO itself.

{code}
 <minim:Constraint rdf:about="#runnable_RO">
    <minim:forPurpose>Runnable</minim:forPurpose>
    <minim:onResource rdf:resource="." />
    <minim:toModel rdf:resource="#runnable_RO_model" />
    <rdfs:comment>
      Constraint to be satisfied if the RO is to be runnable
    </rdfs:comment>
  </minim:Constraint>
{code}

h5. Minim Model (checklist)

A minim model represents a checklist to be evaluated.  It enumerates of a number of requirements which may be declared at levels of MUST, SHOULD or MAY be satisfied for the model as a whole to be considered satisfied.  This follows a structure for minimum information models proposed by Matthew Gamble.

{code}
  <minim:Model rdf:about="#runnable_RO_model">
    <rdfs:label>Runnable RO</rdfs:label>
    <rdfs:comment>
      This model defines information that must be available for the 
      requirements Research Object to be runnable.
    </rdfs:comment>
    <minim:hasMustRequirement rdf:resource="#environment-software/lpod-show" />
    <minim:hasMustRequirement rdf:resource="#environment-software/python" />
    <minim:hasMustRequirement rdf:resource="#isPresent/workflow-instance" />
    <minim:hasMustRequirement rdf:resource="#isPresent/workflow-inputfiles" />
  </minim:Model>
{code}

h5. Minim Requirements

Minim Requirements are evaluated using rules, which in turn invoke checklist evaluation primitives with appropriate parameters.  This structure allows a relatively wide range of checklist items to be evaluated based on a relatively small number of primitive tests.  The examples show the various primitives.

*Requirement for an RO to contain a workflow primitive*

The {{minim:ContentMatchRequirementRule}} is driven by a SPARQL query probe which is evaluated over a merge of all the RO annotations (including the RO manifest).  In this case, it simply tests that the query can be satisfied.  The {{minim:showpass}} and {{minim:showfail}} properties indicate strings that are used for reporting the status of the checklist evaluation.

{code}
  <!-- Workflow instance must be present -->
  <minim:Requirement rdf:about="#isPresent/workflow-instance">
    <minim:isDerivedBy>
      <minim:ContentMatchRequirementRule>
        <minim:exists>
          ?wf rdf:type wfdesc:Workflow .
        </minim:exists>
        <minim:showpass>Workflow instance or template found</minim:showpass>
        <minim:showfail>No workflow instance or template found</minim:showfail>
        <minim:derives rdf:resource="#isPresent/workflow-instance" />
      </minim:ContentMatchRequirementRule>
    </minim:isDerivedBy>
  </minim:Requirement>
{code}

*Requirement for workflow output files to be present*

This use of a {{minim:ContentMatchRequirementRule}} uses the SPARQL query as a probe to find all workflow output files mentioned according to the wfdesc description vocabulary, and for each of these tests that the indicated resource is indeed aggregated by the RO (a weak notion of being "present" in the RO).  The URI of the required aggregated resource is constructed using a URI template ([http://tools.ietf.org/html/rfc6570]) with query result values.  The diagnostic messages can interpolate query result values, as in the case of {{minim:showfail}} in this example.

{code}
  <!-- Workflow output files must be present -->
  <minim:Requirement rdf:about="#isPresent/workflow-outputfiles">
    <minim:isDerivedBy>
      <minim:ContentMatchRequirementRule>
        <minim:forall>
          ?wf rdf:type wfdesc:Workflow ;
              wfdesc:hasOutput [ wfdesc:hasArtifact ?of ] .
        </minim:forall>
        <minim:aggregatesTemplate>{+of}</minim:aggregatesTemplate>
        <minim:showpass>All workflow outputs referenced or present</minim:showpass>
        <minim:showfail>Workflow %(wf)s output %(of)s not found</minim:showfail>
        <minim:derives rdf:resource="#isPresent/workflow-outputfiles" />
      </minim:ContentMatchRequirementRule>
    </minim:isDerivedBy>
  </minim:Requirement>
{code}

*Software environment testing*

A {{minim:SoftwareEnvironmentRule}} tests to see if a particular piece of software is available by issuing a command and checking the response against a supplied regular expression.  (This test is primarily intended for local use within RO-manager, and may be of limited use on the evaluationb service as the command is issued on the host running the evaluation service, not on the host requesting the service.)

{code}
  <!-- Environment needs python -->
  <minim:Requirement rdf:about="#environment-software/python">
    <minim:isDerivedBy>
      <minim:SoftwareEnvironmentRule>
        <minim:command>python --version</minim:command>
        <minim:response>Python 2.7</minim:response>
        <minim:show>Installed python version %(response)s</minim:show>
        <minim:derives rdf:resource="#environment-software/python" />
      </minim:SoftwareEnvironmentRule>
    </minim:isDerivedBy>
  </minim:Requirement>
{code}

h4. Evaluation  results

Evaluation results are an RDF or JSON file containing a fully detailed description of the results of a checklist evaluation.  RDF results are reported using the Minim vocabulary and requirement URIs, together with additional terms to include diagnostic and summary information.

Example of RDF (Turtle syntax here):
{code}
PREFIX rdf:        <http://www.w3.org/1999/02/22-rdf-syntax-ns#>
PREFIX spin:       <http://spinrdf.org/sp#>
PREFIX result:     <http://www.w3.org/2001/sw/DataAccess/tests/result-set#>
PREFIX minim:      <http://purl.org/minim/minim#>
<http://sandbox.example.org/ROs/myro>
  minim:testedConstraint   <http://another.example.com/minim/repeatable.rdf#runnable-RO-constraint> ;
  minim:testedPurpose      "Runnable" ;
  minim:testedTarget       <http://sandbox.example.org/ROs/myro> ;
  minim:fullySatisfies     <http://another.example.com/minim/repeatable.rdf#runnable-RO-checklist> ;
  minim:nominallySatisfies <http://another.example.com/minim/repeatable.rdf#runnable-RO-checklist> ;
  minim:minimallySatisfies <http://another.example.com/minim/repeatable.rdf#runnable-RO-checklist> ;
  # minim:missingMust      ... (none)
  # minim:missingShould    ... (none)
  # minim:missingMay       ... (none)
  minim:satisfied
    [ minim:tryRule <http://another.example.com/minim/repeatable.rdf#environment-software/lpod-show> ],
    [ minim:tryRule <http://another.example.com/minim/repeatable.rdf#environment-software/python> ],
    [ minim:tryRule <http://another.example.com/minim/repeatable.rdf#isPresent/workflow-instance>],
    [ minim:tryRule <http://another.example.com/minim/repeatable.rdf#isPresent/workflow-inputfiles> ;
      result:binding [ result:variable "wf" ; result:value "http://sandbox.example.org/ROs/myro/docs/mkjson.sh" ],
      result:binding [ result:variable "wi" ; result:value "GZZzLCkR38" ],
      result:binding [ result:variable "if" ; result:value "http://sandbox.example.org/ROs/myro/data/UserRequirements-gen.ods" ]
    ] .
{code}

These are mainly terms from the current MINIM vocabulary, with a few new ones added to provide more detailed diagnostic information about the evaluation result:
* {{minim:testedConstraint}} is the URI of the constraint
* {{minim:testedTarget}} is the URI of the target of the constraint
* {{minim:testedPurpose}} is the URI of the constraint
* {{minim:missingMust}} refers to a minim:hasMustRequirement rule for the model used that is not satisfied by the RO with corresponding variable bindings where appropriate
* {{minim:missingShould}} refers to a minim:hasShouldRequirement rule for the model used that is not satisfied by the RO, with corresponding variable bindings where appropriate
* {{minim:missingMay}} refers to a minim:hasMayRequirement rule for the model used that is not satisfied by the RO, with corresponding variable bindings where appropriate
* {{minim:satisfied}} refers to a rule that is satisfied by the RO,  with corresponding variable bindings where appropriate
* {{minim:tryRule}} object is URI of a rule in the MINIM model.

URIs that that appear as object values above are references to elements of the MINIM model tested, and are defined in the minim description resource.

@@TODO JSON format for results TBD; proposed to use something like a JSON-LD rendering of the RDF.

h3. Relations

h4. [http://purl.org/ro/service/evaluate/] @@TBD

This relation is generally used used in the service description document

It indicates a relation between a service description and a URI template for RO evaluation results using the described service.  The URI template is is used to construct a service result URI by:
# applying the URI template expansion procedures with caller-supplied RO URI, minim URI, purpose and target URIs, and
# resolving the resulting URI-reference to an absolute URI using normal URI resolution rules (e.g. typically, using the service document URI as a base URI)

See:
* [http://tools.ietf.org/html/rfc6570]
* [http://tools.ietf.org/html/rfc3986]

h3. HTTP methods

The service responds to an HTTP GET with the results of a checklist evaluation, using the URI defined by expanding the template provided by the [http://purl.org/ro/service/evaluate/] relation in the service description.

h2. Proposed Minim enhancements

In viewing the proposals for liveness and integrity testing, compare with the current framework used for testing that an RO aggregates a specified resource; the following rule example tests that all workflow inputs are aggregated by the evaluated RO:

{code}
  <minim:ContentMatchRequirementRule>
    <minim:forall>
      ?wf rdf:type wfdesc:Workflow ;
          wfdesc:hasInput [ wfdesc:hasArtifact ?if ] .
    </minim:forall>
    <minim:aggregatesTemplate>{+if}</minim:aggregatesTemplate>
      :
  </minim:ContentMatchRequirementRule>
{code}

h3. Liveness testing

To test for liveness of a resource, the evaluator will need to attempt to access the resource.  If it is a local file, a file existence check should suffice.  If it is a web resource, then a success response to an HTTP HEAD request is expected.

{code}
  <minim:ContentMatchRequirementRule>
    <minim:forall>
      ?wf rdf:type wfdesc:Workflow ;
          wfdesc:hasInput [ wfdesc:hasArtifact ?if ] .
    </minim:forall>
      <minim:accessTemplate>{+if}</minim:accessTemplate>
      :
  </minim:ContentMatchRequirementRule>
{code}

This varies from the simple aggregation test in that the {{minim::aggregatesTemplate}} property is replaced by a {{minim:accessTemplate}} property.

h3. Integrity testing

In this context, "integrity testing" means checking that a resource content matches some expected (e.g. previously calculated) value.

The integrity testing builds upon the liveness testing, by adding a reference to a resource with which the tested resource may be compared, by way of the {{minim:contentMatchTemplate}} property.  Note that this property says nothing about using a hash or checksum value; the plan is that it's just the URI of a resource with which to compare.  But that URI may be an ni: URI (cf. [http://tools.ietf.org/html/draft-farrell-decade-ni-06]), in which case, instead of trying to dereference the URI and do a byte-by-byte comparison, instead it calculates the appropriate hash function over the resource being tested and compares that with the value encoded by the ni: URI.  To check for a known constant value, a data: URI ([http://tools.ietf.org/html/rfc2397]) can be used.

This structure assumes that appropriate annotations have been created to allow a SPARQL query to discover the URI of an appropriate resource with which to match the content.  If may turn out that further queries against a separate RO are needed, in which case the above structure may need to be expanded.  In the example below, the annotation is a {{roeval:contentMatch}} property directly about the resource being integrity-checked.

{code}
  <minim:ContentMatchRequirementRule>
    <minim:forall>
      ?wf rdf:type wfdesc:Workflow ;
          wfdesc:hasInput [ wfdesc:hasArtifact ?if ] .
      ?if roeval:contentMatch ?match .
    </minim:forall>
    <minim:accessTemplate>{+if}</minim:accessTemplate>
    <minim:contentMatchTemplate>{+match}</minim:contentMatchTemplate>
      :
  </minim:ContentMatchRequirementRule>
{code}

h3. Resource annotation with checksum values

Integrity checking with a single RO may be achieved by adding checksum annotations to the resources that subsequently will be tested.  A new RO-manager command could be provided to facilitate creation of such annotations; e.g.

{code}
  ro content-hash _resource_
{code}

which would calculate and output an appropriate ni: URI, and could be used as part of an RO command thus:

{code}
  ro annotate _resource1_ _attribute-name_ `ro content-hash _resource2_`
{code}

This flexible approach would allow a checksum to be calculated from one RO and applied as a reference for checking to another.  But this combination of commands might be difficult to do in some systems (e.g. Windows), so a less flexible form of command might be offered:

{code}
  ro annotate-hash _resource1_ roeval:contentMatch _resource2_
{code}

where {{{_}resource1{_}}} would be annotated with the content hash of {{{_}resource2{_}}}, using the indicated attribute identifier.


h3. Comparing with a reference object or resource

A proposed requirement is that contents of one RO can be compared with the content of another \_calibration\_ (or \_reference_) RO.

This might be achieved by adding an annotation to an RO referring to its corresponding calibration RO. It is expected that this information might be provided by RO evolution information, but in the absence of such annotations a new, specialized annotation might be needed for this.

Operationally, the comparison between ROs might be invoked in any of the following ways:
* One RO contains links to its corresponding calibration RO.  This would appear to be quite natural if one RO is derived from another: it's evolution trace would contain a reference to the RO from which it is derived, but would be useful only when that is the RO with which one would want to perform the comparison.  This would limit the scope of ROs that could be compared to those that are explicitly related to each other.  Thus, a researcher finding two independent ROs that claim to calculate a common value would not be able to simply compare those without first (copying and) modifying at least one of them.
* References to the calibration RO are carried in the Minim description.  This would limit the range of ROs with which such a Minim description might be used, and would make it harder or impossible to create truly generic checklists that compare different ROs.
* A new RO might contain references to two other ROs to be compared.
* The URIs of the ROs to be compared could be provided in the service invocation.

@@TODO - define how to handle this.  We need a clearer view of the use-cases to best understand which approach(es) would be most appropriate.

h3. Constraint references to RO and target resources

Currently, the mechanisms used for defining {{minim:Constraint}} values contain references to the RO, which makes it difficult to use the same Minim resource with multiple ROs.

Current structure:
{code}
  <rdf:Description rdf:about=".">
    <minim:hasConstraint>
      <minim:Constraint rdf:about="#runnable_RO">
        <minim:forPurpose>Runnable</minim:forPurpose>
        <minim:onResource rdf:resource="." />
        <minim:toModel rdf:resource="#runnable_RO_model" />
        <rdfs:comment>
          Constraint to be satisfied if the RO is to be runnable
        </rdfs:comment>
      </minim:Constraint>
    </minim:hasConstraint>
  </rdf:Description>
{code}

Outline of change proposal:
* Do not use the {{minim:hasConstraint}} property when selecting potential constraints; instead, query the Minim description for *all* resources of type {{minim:Constraint}}.
* as an alternative to {{minim:onResource}} for selecting the target resource, also recognize a {{minim:onResourceTemplate}} parameter whose value is a string containing a URI template.  The URI template is expanded with variables {{RoUri}} being the URI of the RO being evaluated, and {{TargetUri}} being the URI reference of the selected target (which defaults to the RO URI if no specific target is selected).  The URI reference resulting from the expansion may be resolved to a full URI using the RO URI as a base URI.

Thus, the above example might become:
{code}
  <minim:Constraint rdf:about="#runnable_RO">
    <minim:forPurpose>Runnable</minim:forPurpose>
    <minim:onResourceTemplate>{+RoUri}<minim:onResourceTemplate>
    <minim:toModel rdf:resource="#runnable_RO_model" />
    <rdfs:comment>
      Constraint to be satisfied if the RO is to be runnable
    </rdfs:comment>
  </minim:Constraint>
{code}
A further development might allow an additional SPARQL query to be used, which is executed against a merge of the RO annotations resultingin additional variable bindings that can be referenced by the target resource template. Such might be used, for example, to locate a workflow template within the RO that uses a particular global database, which in turn might be used to test that the corresponding provenance record indicates use of an up-to-date version of that database.